---
title: RFC 7873 DNS Cookies
tags: [RFCs]
date: 2023-12-01
---

# Summary

DNS Cookies provide a lightweight session mechanism for DNS. Essentially, the Client generates a pseudorandom Cookie based on its IP, the DNS Server IP, and some secret. The Server generates a Cookie based on the Client Cookie, which the Client then includes in future requests alongside its Client Cookie.

DNS Cookies make it easier for DNS Servers to reason about their Clients and protect themselves against certain types of attacks. They provide no full safety guarantees but massively reduce the chance of an attacker correctly inserting themselves into the request path.

# Why?

DNS Cookies exist to protect DNS Servers and Clients from various attacks, including DoS, amplification, and forgery attacks.

- **DoS**: A DoS attack is when a malicious actor floods a DNS Server with lookups to overload it. The lookups usually have a fake source address.
- **DNS amplification**: Related to the above. By flooding a DNS Server with requests populated with the same fake source address, the service residing at the specified source address can be overloaded or disrupted by responses coming from the DNS Server.
- **Answer forgery**: If a Server or resolver needs to recursively do a DNS lookup, an attacker can man-in-the-middle the resolution and provide the first DNS Server with maliciously incorrect information.

These problems can be somewhat solved with existing DNS security mechanisms like DNSSEC, but existing solutions are generally heavy and require widespread adoption. DNS cookies are extremely lightweight and massively reduce the impact of attacks.

# How?

DNS cookies live in the OPT RR section. The Client Cookie is 8 bytes and the Server cookie is between 8 and 32 bytes (inclusive).

- Client Cookies SHOULD be some pseudorandom function of the Client IP and Server IP and other things such as a random number or secret. Using the Client IP prevents DNS Servers from tracking Clients across network changes, and using the Server IP makes the Cookie Client<->Server specific which enhances security and makes impersonation harder.
- Server Cookies SHOULD be a pseudorandom function of the Client IP, the Client Cookie, and other things such as a random number or secret.
- Both Client and Server Cookies should be changed "periodically".

When a Client first sends a DNS request, it generates and includes its Client Cookie. If it has a Server Cookie cached, it SHOULD include that as well.

Servers verify Server Cookies given by Clients. If a Cookie is invalid or incorrectly specified, the Server SHOULD process the request as if it had no Cookie.

# Interesting bits

- Server Cookies are generated from Client Cookies so that many clients sharing a logical port behind a single NAT can still be disambiguated by the Server.
- As part of the adoption of this RFC, IANA created a new DNS response code: RCODE 23 BADCOOKIE.