---
title: RFC 8446 TLS 1.3
tags: [RFCs]
date: 2023-12-05
---

[Link](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8446)

This one is a doozy. I didn't read the entire thing deeply but I still learned some things! Most of the cryptographic stuff (i.e. most of the RFC) went over my head. I learned enough to help me understand Wireshark output and that's enough for me.

# Why?

Many original internet protocols are inherently insecure, transmitting plaintext data over untrusted intermediate devices operated by potentially malicious or hacked actors. TLS provides a secure channel between two peers with the following properties:

- Authentication: The server side is always authenticated.
- Confidentiality: Data is only visible and legible to the endpoints.
- Integrity: Data cannot be modified without detection. (I didn't know about this one but it makes sense. Neat!)

# How

TLS consists of two protocols: a handshake protocol and a record protocol. Devices speaking TLS to each other must already have a reliable transport connection opened between them. The specifics of how two devices or a higher-level protocol decide to use TLS are out of scope for this RFC.

## Handshake protocol

The handshake can be thought of as having three phases:

- Key exchange: trade keys, select cryptographic algorithm and parameters. Everything from here on is encrypted.
- Server parameters: Establish "other handshake parameters."
- Authentication: Authenticate the server and possibly the client, confirm handshake integrity.

### ClientHello

The client opens a TLS connection by sending a ClientHello message. It includes everything the server needs to know to speak TLS back to the client: the client's supported encryption algorithms (selected from the approved list), the client nonce, some other cryptographic stuff.

ClientHello is unencrypted.

### ServerHello

The server's equivalent to the above: the server selects a cryptographic algorithm from the list in ClientHello, selects keys from those offered by the client, etc. The server's Certificate, CertificateAuthority, and some other details are encrypted using keys from ClientHello. The certificate can request a ClientCertificate here if it wants to speak mTLS.

The server authenticates itself as the actual Certificate owner by sending a CertificateVerify message: a signature over the entire handshake using the private key associated with the Certificate. Cool!

### Authentication

The client can now verify the legitimacy of the server's CertificateVerify message. If the server has requested a ClientCertificate to speak mTLS, the client will now send its Certificate and CertificateVerify message.

There's also a Finished message that the server sends to the client after ServerHello and the client sends to the server at the end of its authentication -- it seems pretty similar to CertificateVerify. The RFC says it "message provides key confirmation, binds the endpoint's identity to the exchanged keys, and in PSK mode also authenticates the handshake."

## Record protocol

The record layer breaks information blocks into records of <= 2^14 bytes. Basically it takes a stream of data, breaks it into chunks, encrypts the chunks, and sends them along. On the other side, the record protocol verifies the chunks, decrypts them, then sticks them together into a contiguous data stream.

In TLS 1.3, as opposed to previous versions of TLS, all ciphers are modeled as "Authenticated Encryption with Associated Data" (AEAD). If I'm reading correctly, that means that authentication (signing?) and encryption happen at the same time, and authentication (reading the signature?) and decryption happen at the same time. Cool!

There are several ways to pad TLS records, and applications are allowed to send zero-length TLS messages. Both of these help throw off anyone trying to do traffic analysis.

# Interesting bits

- The spec says that the only requirement for the underlying transport layer is that in provides a reliable, in-order data stream. Makes sense! I only ever think about TLS in a TCP context. 
