---
title: RFC 8890 The Internet is for End Users
tags: [RFCs]
date: 2023-12-04
---

[Link](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8890)

# Summary

This is an informational RFC, instead of the usual types (best practice, proposed standard, internet standard, ...). This document is from the IAB (Internet Architecture Board), a group separate from the IETF. It basically states that:

- People use the internet who are not neccesarily technical or involved in the development of the internet
- Those people have different needs from each other, and often different needs from network operators
- Whenever there is conflict between "end-user" interests and other parties interests, end-user interests should win out.

# Why?

Many people use the internet. The IETF has had since its inception the goal of fostering the growth and development of the internet for the broader good of people and society.

# How

I gotta say, I'm unimpressed by the recommendations:

- Engage the internet community (a feeling of deference is not enough; IETF contributors should proactively engage with possibly affected groups of users).
- Create end-user focused systems. The document specifically sites the use of a "user agent" (browser) in the Web context as an example of explicitly including the end user in protocol design.
- Identify negative end-user impact. Nothing really said in this section beyond the title.
- Handle conflict of end-user needs. "If your decision is harming one group of end users but helping another, then think about that maybe."
- Deprioritize internal needs. In other words, don't be obsessed with process purity or author convenience.

# Interesting bits

None.