---
title: RFC 9113 HTTP/2
tags: [RFCs]
date: 2023-12-03
---

[Link](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9113)

# Summary

HTTP/2 improves on HTTP/1.1. Specifically it increases performance by using the underlying TCP connection(s) more efficiently: HTTP/1.1 allows for request pipelining, but requests are still processed sequentially. Furthermore, HTTP/1.0 and /1.1 have verbose and repetitive headers. HTTP/2.0 defines semantics for request-response interleaving on the same TCP connection, specifies a less verbose way of specifying headers for repeated requests, and introduces the concept of request priorities.

# Why?

Pretty much the problems with HTTP/1.1:

- Truly concurrent requests require multiple TCP connections.
- Requests are processed sequentially with no way for an important request to cut the line.
- Headers are verbose, using unnecessary bandwidth.

# How

Buckle up, this one is a doozy.

## Initializing a connection

Apparently TLS has a "TLS application-layer protocol negotiation (ALPN) extension field" which TLS negotiators can use to specify the protocol. Over HTTPS, the endpoints use the string "h2" in the ALPN extension field to specify that they will speak HTTP/2 next.

Over plaintext TCP (ew, why would you speak plaintext TCP), a server can send the "h2c" string in the HTTP/1.1 Upgrade header field to indicate it wants to speak HTTP/2. There's some extra stuff here about sending and agreeing on the HTTP/2 settings.

## Frames

Each HTTP/2 frame has a fixed-length header and a variable-length payload. The maximum size of the payload is 2^14 unless the receiver has set a larger value for SETTINGS_MAX_FRAME_SIZE. The header includes information about the frame type and a 31-bit Stream Identifier, which MUST be set (values of 0x0 are interpreted to refer to the entire connection instead of any individual stream). 31 bits is a weird choice: the 1 reserved bit MUST not be set by the client and MUST be ignored by the receiver. Weird!

Frame types:

- DATA (identifier 0x00). Arbitrary data.
- HEADERS (identifier 0x01). Carry headers or trailers.
- PRIORITY (identifier 0x02). Deprecated.
- RST_STREAM (identifier 0x03). Immediately terminate the stream. Used to indicate errors and reject PUSH_PROMISE requests, among other things.
- SETTINGS (identifier 0x04). Defines how the connection works. Each endpoint MUST send a SETTINGS frame to start the connection and MAY send other SETTINGS frames over the lifetime of the connection. Values in a SETTINGS frame overwrite previous settings values for the connection.
- PUSH_PROMISE (identifier 0x05). Used to notify the other endpoint of streams which the sender intends to initiate.
- PING (identifier 0x06). Used to measure RTT (round-trip time) and check if a connection is still functional.
- GOAWAY (identifier 0x07). Initiates a graceful shutdown of the connection. GOAWAY applies to the whole connection,never a single stream.
- WINDOW_UPDATE (identifier 0x08). Used for flow control.
- CONTINUATION (identifier 0x09). Used "to continue a sequence of field block fragments". I'm not entirely sure what a field block segment is but I think it's basically an encrypted header.
- 

## Headers

Headers work basically like HTTP/1.1 headers. However, they must be sent in a contiguous series of frames with NO other frames interleaved. The last frame MUST have the END_HEADERS flag set. If there are any errors decompressing or processing headers, the process receiving the headers MUST treat them as a connection error.

## Streams

A "stream" is an independent, bidirectional sequence of frames exchanged between the client and server within an HTTP/2 connection. A stream is a logical connection, many of which are multiplexed onto a single physical TCP connection. Either endpoint of an HTTP/2 conversation can create a stream -- if there is a mismatch (i.e. if one endpoint receives a frame for a stream it does not know about or thinks is closed) it SHOULD respond with RST_STREAM.

The RFC has a nice flow diagram of possible states a stream can be in. It's pretty much what one would expect.

## Flow Control

Because many logical streams are multiplexed to the same underlying TCP connection, we need flow control to specify how to handle contention. The server is ultimately in charge of flow control but the client can also request flow control changes. Clients can provide prioritization information as described in [RFC7540](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9113#name-document-organization:~:text=Section%205.3.5%20of%20%5B-,RFC7540,-%5D%20are%20known) to help servers process requests more efficiently and effectively.

# Sending an HTTP Message

A single HTTP message in HTTP/2 consists of one HEADERS frame, zero or more CONTINUATION frames, zero or more DATA frames, then zero or one HEADERS frame (representing a trailer). The last frame in the sequence carries an END_STREAM flag.

# Interesting bits

- Streams initiated by the client MUST use odd-numbered integers as identifiers, while streams initiated by the server MUST use even numbers. Stream identifiers MUST be greater than all other streams the initiator has opened or reserved.