---
title: RFC 8484 DNS Over HTTPS
tags: [RFCs]
date: 2023-12-02
---

# Summary

DNS Over HTTPS specifies how DNS clients can use HTTPS (and thus TLS) as a transport layer to talk to their recursive resolvers.

# Why?

This RFC is very clear that it is designed with only two use-cases in mind:

- Preventing on-path devices (i.e. intermediate networking nodes) from interfering with DNS operations.
- Allowing web apps to access DNS information using existing APIs in a CORS-friendly way.

Since DNS-over-TLS already existed before this RFC, I would guess its real value is mainly in the latter.

# How?

Each DNS-over-HTTPS server is configured with a URI template describing where it can receive DNS requests. (Configuration and URI discovery for clients is out of scope.) For example, "https://dnssrv.example.com/query{?dns}. A DNS client can use GET or POST to send DNS requests over HTTPS. If the DNS client uses GET, the URI variable "dns" MUST be the base64-encoded content of the DNS request. If the DNS client uses POST, it includes the DNS request in the message body. DNS servers MUST implement GET and POST. The DNS-over-HTTPS server responds by packing the DNS-wire-format message into the HTTP response body.

If the DNS-over-HTTPS server encounters an error while processing the request, it MUST respond with a non-successful HTTP status code. This indicates to the client that there is no DNS message in the response body. Clients can handle HTTP response codes per usual (retries, trying a different server, fixing their auth tokens, etc). [Note that standard DNS "errors" such as NXDOMAIN would still give a 2xx error code, and NXDOMAIN would be in the DNS message in the response body.]

The caching strategy is what you would expect:

- HTTP responses SHOULD set explicit freshness less than or equal to the shortest TTL of a record in the DNS response.
- If the server is considering the client's identity while responding to the request, it SHOULD use the no-cache directive.

# Interesting bits

- POST messages are smaller, but GET messages are more friendly to HTTP caching (makes sense).
- The RFC defines a new content type: "application/dns-message"
- The wire format specified for DNS-over-HTTPS is different from that of DNS-over-TLS.
